Regex intermediate (#403)
arcus/education_modules: regular_expressions_intermediate/regular_expressions_intermediate.md

<!--

author:   Joy Payton
email:    paytonk@chop.edu
version:  1.0.0
current_version_description: Initial version
module_type: standard
docs_version: 1.0.0
language: en
narrator: US English Female
mode: Textbook
previous_sequential_module: regular_expressions_basics

> title: Regular Expressions: Intermediate Level

Reviewer: suggestion: make this title match the format of Regular Expressions Basics (or make that title match this format)

Author: @drelliche I was trying to mimic the SQL series here, which has Basics and Intermediate, but I'm game to change things up!  Below I put in a comma instead of a colon, does this help?
```suggestion
title: Regular Expressions, Intermediate Level
```

comment:  Grow in your ability to use regular expressions, or regex, for complex pattern matching.

long_description: Learn to compose intermediate regular expressions using capturing groups, anchors, boundaries, and more, in order to find and extract important text that matches patterns you describe.

estimated_time_in_minutes: 60

@pre_reqs
Learners should have some experience composing and using simple regular expressions (regex).  For an introduction to regular expression concepts, consider the [Demystifying Regular Expressions](https://liascript.github.io/course/?https://raw.githubusercontent.com/arcus/education_modules/main/demystifying_regular_expressions/demystifying_regular_expressions.md#1) module.  To learn how to compose and use simple regular expressions, consider the [Regular Expressions Basics](https://liascript.github.io/course/?https://raw.githubusercontent.com/arcus/education_modules/main/regular_expressions_basics/regular_expressions_basics.md#1) module.
@end

@learning_objectives  
After completion of this module, learners will be able to:

- Explain what a regular expression flag does
- Define a pattern in regex notation that uses a capturing group

> - Define a pattern in regex notation that uses the `|` symbol as a logical or 

Reviewer: I was initially thrown by this as a sentence :) 
```suggestion
- Define a pattern in regex notation that uses the `|` symbol as a logical OR 
```

- Use anchors and boundaries in regular expressions
- Explain why a "lookahead" can be useful in a regular expression

@end

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
good_first_module: false
coding_required: true
coding_level: intermediate
sequence_name: regex
previous_sequential_module: regular_expressions_basics
@sets_you_up_for
@end 
@depends_on_knowledge_available_in
- regular_expressions_basics
-demystifying_regular_expressions
@end
```

@version_history 
No previous versions.
@end

import: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/arcus/education_modules/main/_module_templates/macros.md
-->

# Regular Expressions: Intermediate Level

@overview

## Regular Expression Refresher

A **regular expression** (also known as "regex") is a specific way to **express** a **rule** for a pattern.  Regular expressions are useful to biomedical researchers because they can allow you to find, replace, or extract text that matches patterns you define.  

> A good place to practice regular expressions is an online regex testing website.  We like "Regex 101", at https://www.regex101.com.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A good place to practice regular expressions is an online regex testing website.  We like **Regex 101**, at https://www.regex101.com.
```

Regex consists of **tokens** which represent characters that appear in a particular location, and **quantifiers**, which give the number of times a given token repeats.

> Examples of **tokens** include `\d`, `[A-Za-z]`, `A`, and `.`.  
> 
> Examples of **quantifiers** include `*`, `{2,5}`, and `+`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Tokens** include `\d`, `[A-Za-z]`, `A`, and `.`

- **Quantifiers** include `*`, `{2,5}`, and `+`
```

* **Multiline (m)**.  This flag indicates that each line should be treated as its own string, instead of all the lines being considered one string.  This is important when working with start-of-string and end-of-string **anchors**, which we'll talk about later in this module.
* **Ignore / Insensitive (i)**.  "Ignore" indicates that pattern matching should be case-insensitive, so that differences in capitalization are ignored.

If you use different "flags" than we do (for example, if you're not using the default [Regex 101](https://www.regex101.com) as your regex checker), you might see an occasional difference in how the regular expression we show works in your environment.  In the regex checker you're using, try setting your flags to "global" and "multiline", and you should get identical results to what we show here in this module.  The flags usually are shown following a forward slash, appearing just after the regular expression ends:

![](media/example1.png)<!-- style = "border: 1px solid rgb(var(--color-highlight)); max-width: 400px;" -->

![](media/example2.png)<!-- style = "border: 1px solid rgb(var(--color-highlight)); max-width: 300px;" -->

> ![](media/example3.png)<!-- style = "border: 1px solid rgb(var(--color-highlight)); max-width: 400px;" -->

Reviewer: All of these should have alt text (i.e. the input box of a regular expression checker) and probably also a caption explaining what regex checker they are from.

Author: Agree, adding in new commit

<div class = "behind-the-scenes">
<b style="color: rgb(var(--color-highlight));">Behind the scenes</b><br>
If you do some internet searches or use a regular expression checker, you might wondering why regular expressions are often written between forward slashes.  That's because of how regular expressions are written in some programming languages like Perl and Javascript and some utilities like `sed`.  
<br/><br/>
You don't need to worry about enclosing your regular expressions in forward slashes for this module.  In fact, depending on what kind of code you write, you may never have to enclose your regular expressions in forward slashes.  Still, it's somewhat customary to see regular expressions written this way.
</div>

> ### Quiz 1: Flags

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Quiz: Flags
```

Which of the following statements are true?  Check all that apply.

[[ ]] Flags are only important if you're working in Perl.

> [[ ]] Flags are written as the last letter or letters of a regular expression.

Reviewer: This is subtle! I like it!

[[X]] Flags alter the rules around regular expression parsing.
[[X]] One common flag is "global", written with a "g", which allows for multiple matches.
***
<div class = "answer">

> Flags can be important whether you're writing code or using a regular expressions checker, so it's not true that flags only matter for Perl code.  Flags are declared outside of the definition of a regular expression, so the second statement is also false.  The last two statements are true.  Flags alter the rules around regular expression parsing, and one common flag is "global", written with a "g", which allows for multiple matches.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Flags can be important whether you're writing code or using a regular expressions checker, so it's not true that flags only matter for Perl code.  Flags are declared outside of the definition of a regular expression, so the second statement is also false.  The last two statements are true.  Flags alter the rules around regular expression parsing, and one common flag is "global," written with a `g`, which allows for multiple matches.
```

We'll add the pattern `(\d+)_([PMF])_([A-Z\d]+)_(\d+)` to the small box labeled "regular expression", and our sample id, `002923_P_A56G199C2_030023472948651`, to the larger box labeled "test string".  [We can then see our captured groups on the right!](https://regex101.com/r/XmG4kp/1)

![The regex101 website with the aforementioned pattern and test string added.  Four groups are indicated in colorful highlights, listed in the match information pane, and explained in depth in the explanation pane.](media/capturing_groups.png)<!-- style = "border: 1px solid rgb(var(--color-highlight));" -->

We see four groups listed in the "Match Information" pane on the right side.  Above that pane, the "Explanation" pane goes into detail about each group.

> ### Quiz 2: Capturing Groups

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Quiz: Capturing Groups
```

* `@` indicates the `@`
* `[A-Za-z\d\-\._]+` again means one or more letter, number, hyphen, period, or underscore ("fakemail")
* `\.` indicates a literal period
* `[A-Za-z]{2,}` indicates two or more letters ("org").

In our case, we had a capturing group around the last three of those bullet points.  That means that what is captured is "fastmail.org", the entire email domain.

</div>
***

### Non-Capturing Groups and the Logical "Or"

Sometimes you want to define two different pattern options at a certain point in a complex string.  For example, let's consider a mouse model study of the immune system's interaction with insulin.  

Your wild type subjects are given identifiers that include `WT` (wild type), followed by a hyphen, and a subject identifier of usually five (but possibly 6) digits.  You additionally have PBMC humanized mice, in addition to wild type mice, and their identifiers begin with `PBMC`, followed by a hyphen, followed by 5-6 digits.

There's a handy way to indicate a logical "or" in regex, using the vertical pipe (`|`).  Tokens on either side of a `|` character are alternative values for the given part of a pattern. 

> For example, `8|5` indicates that either an 8 or a 5 appears at a given location. `banana|B` indicates that the word "banana" or the abbreviation "B" appears.  And `NA|\d{4}|unknown` indicates that one of "NA", a four digit number, or "unknown" should appear.

Reviewer: Could you add a care box or other explanation reminder here to clarify the difference between the pipe and list from the basics module?

- Is there any actual difference between `8|5` and `[85]`?
- Emphasize that `banana|B` is something that we genuinely couldn't do without the pipe.

Author: Added a care box to explain the two bullet points.  However, is the "or means at least one of the following possibilities" logic actually that subtle or new?  I think most people understand the logic of "I want a sandwich or a bowl of soup or a bagel or a salad" without going into the associative property...

Would `WT|PBMC\-\d{5,6}` work?  No!  That would be interpreted as one of the following:

* 'WT' (by itself) **or**
* 'PBMC' followed by a hyphen and 5-6 digits.

That's not what we mean!  And we can't use a space to our regex to syntactically separate our "or" clause from the rest of the regular expression. After all, a space is interpreted literally, as a space that belongs in the pattern.  So, what can we do? We can use parentheses for grouping. 

`(WT|PBMC)\-\d{5,6}` would work, and would be interpreted as:

* "WT" or "PBMC" (and capture whichever it is)
* Then a hyphen
* Then 5-6 digits

[That expression will work as valid regex](https://regex101.com/r/ZHs5iI/1) that will match with your various mouse subject ids.  However, you really don't need to capture that group, you're just using the parentheses to enclose a group that could go one of two different ways.  If you prefer, you can indicate that it's a non-capturing group by adding `?:` after the opening parenthesis, like this:

`(?:WT|PBMC)\-\d{5,6}`

[This will also work](https://regex101.com/r/ko7ySn/1) as a matching regular expression, but won't capture the group in question.

> ### Quiz 3: Non-Capturing Groups and the Logical "Or"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Quiz: Non-Capturing Groups and the Logical "Or"
```

You're looking through lab notes written by a colleague who uses codes and abbreviations liberally.  This investigator is known to write their lowercase initials ("sjp") and a single space followed by either "help" (always in lowercase) or "911" in notes to highlight important potential pitfalls.  Using the logical "or" and using a non-capturing group (remember: the syntax is `(?:)`), write a regular expression that would allow you to capture any of the "sjp help" or "sjp 911" references.

Put that regular expression in the box below:

> [[sjp (?:help|911)]]

Reviewer: This answer is rendering as a dropdown menu box using the pipe as a line divider. One way to hack this might be to make this a multiple choice question with a bunch of options, although that defeats the "you have to type it out yourself to learn" goal here.... maybe an escape character will help?

Author: Fixed it in a new commit I think!

<script>
  let input = "@input".trim();
  input == "sjp (?:help|911)" || input == "sjp (?:911|help)" ;
</script>
***

> <div class = "answer">

Reviewer: I think some load bearing whitespace is missing because this answer isn't rendering correctly.

Author: Fixed it in a new commit!

You'll begin by posing your two alternatives, either `help|911` or `911|help`, the order doesn't matter.  Then, you wrap that in the non-capturing group to give `(?:help|911)` or `(?:911|help)`.  But don't forget your collague's initials and the space!  The final regex should read `sjp (?:help|911)` or `sjp (?:911|help)`.

</div>
***

## Anchors

Sometimes, it's important that certain characters appear in a certain place in a string.  For example, maybe you're not trying to find all the mouse identifiers in your text, but rather trying to find only those entries in which the line **starts** with an identifier.  

Or maybe you are editing a text transcript and you want to find all the lines that **end** without one of the punctuation marks of `.`, `!`, or `?`.

> The caret symbol `^` (indicating the beginning of a string) and dollar sign `$` (indicating the end of a string) are special characters called "anchors", which can be used when it's important to find patterns in a specific location.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The caret symbol `^` (indicating the beginning of a string) and dollar sign `$` (indicating the end of a string) are special characters called **anchors**, which can be used when it's important to find patterns in a specific location.  
```

However, if [we add the `^` at the start of our pattern](https://regex101.com/r/4HxMlo/1), resulting in `^(?:WT|PBMC)\-\d{5,6}`, we can indicate that our pattern must immediately begin the string:

![Using the pattern that has the anchor followed by the regex for the identifier results in matching the identifier when it starts a line but not matching the identifier when it's in the middle of a line.](media/with_anchor.png)<!-- style = "border: 1px solid rgb(var(--color-highlight)); max-width:400px;" -->

<div class = "important">
<b style="color: rgb(var(--color-highlight));">Important note</b><br>

To correctly use `^` as the start-of-string token, you must not enclose it in square brackets.  If `^` appears inside square brackets, it will be intepreted as doing something quite different, as you are about to discover.

</div>

### End-of-string Anchoring 

Let's check that strings **end** with one of our preapproved punctuation options.  We'd like to match problematic strings, which are ones that don't end in either a period, question mark, or exclamation point.  

> 

Reviewer: Suggestion: break apart end of string anchoring and the "except for" grammar.

Maybe first do an example with `_pre` vs `_post` strings, and then introduce "except for" on a subsequent page, combining it with the end of string anchor.

> There's a helpful bit of grammar in regex that means "except for", when it appears as the first symbol within square brackets.  Interestingly enough, we use `^` to do this.  That symbol does double duty, because we also use `^` to indicate the start of a line, when it's not inside square brackets!  Placement is everything.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There's a helpful bit of grammar in regex that means "except for," when it appears as the first symbol within square brackets.  Interestingly enough, we use `^` to do this.  That symbol does double duty, because we also use `^` to indicate the start of a line, when it's not inside square brackets!  Placement is everything.  
```

</div>

## Boundaries 

Boundaries are similar to anchors in that they allow you to think in advanced ways about where your pattern is positioned.  For example, let's consider **words** and **word boundary**.  

Word characters, expressed in regex as `\w`, are (generally, and this can depend a bit by what flavor of regular expression engine you're using) letters, numbers, and underscores (`_`).  Where word characters meet non-word characters, there's a word boundary, indicated in regex as `\b`.

In the string `subject AB_123 has 10 lesions.`, there are five word boundaries. Between the words and after the last word are non-word characters (four spaces and one period):

*  The point between the "t" in "subject" and the space following it is a word boundary and can be expressed as `\b`.  
* The same is true for the boundary between "3" and the space following it.
* Also there's a word boundary between the "s" in has and the space following it.
* The point between "0" and the space following it, is also a word boundary.
* Finally, between the "s" in "lesions" and the period following it is our final word boundary.

> Word boundaries are useful in case you're looking for patterns that match the start or end of a word.  For example, what if you're looking in a text for "ome" words -- mentions of "microbiome", "genome", "transcriptome", "exome", "proteome", "trisome", "microsome" and similar words?  [If you look just for the pattern `ome`](https://regex101.com/r/gk7BYK/1), you will also match "women", "foment", "moment", "omega" and so on.  

Reviewer: So many commas!!!
```suggestion
Word boundaries are useful in case you're looking for patterns that match the start or end of a word.  For example, what if you're looking in a text for "ome" words -- mentions of "microbiome," "genome," "transcriptome," "exome," "proteome," "trisome," "microsome," and similar words?  [If you look just for the pattern `ome`](https://regex101.com/r/gk7BYK/1), you will also match "women," "foment," "moment," "omega," and so on.  
```

![The regex `ome` matches ten locations that contain "ome" in our silly sentence "The genome of women is home to some of the most comely parts of the human exome: the omega moment that foments the proteome.".](media/without_word_boundary.png)<!-- style = "border: 1px solid rgb(var(--color-highlight)); max-width:400px;" -->

> How can you indicate words that end in "ome"?  [Append a word boundary](https://regex101.com/r/GnLvOU/1) at the end of the `ome` pattern: `ome\b`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
How can you indicate words with "ome" and the end?  [Append a word boundary](https://regex101.com/r/GnLvOU/1) at the end of the `ome` pattern: `ome\b`.
```

![The regex `ome\b` matches five locations in words ending in "ome" in our silly sentence "The genome of women is home to some of the most comely parts of the human exome: the omega moment that foments the proteome.".](media/with_word_boundary.png)<!-- style = "border: 1px solid rgb(var(--color-highlight)); max-width:400px;" -->

> We still have some "false" hits with "home" and "some".  How could we solve this and require at least two, and not just one, leading letter?  That way, "home", "some", "come", "dome", etc. would be excluded, but "exome" would still match.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We still have some "false" hits with "home" and "some."  How could we solve this and require at least two, and not just one, leading letter?  That way, "home," "some," "come," "dome," etc. would be excluded, but "exome" would still match.
```

Greedy
-----

This is a technical term in regex that indicates that a regular expression will, by default, match the longest possible string that will match the pattern.  

In our case, we weren't specific enough, because we said that any character (`.`) could be in the leading part of the string.  That includes letters and spaces.  Therefore, our long phrase "The genome of women is home to some of the most comely parts of the human exome: the omega moment that foments the prote" matches as the longest series of at least two characters preceding "ome" and a word boundary (the period). 

But that's not what we meant!  Luckily we can fix this by being more specific.  Click the regular expressions below to see them *in situ* on Regex 101.

* We could indicate that we want two or more letters, excluding other things like spaces, with [`[A-Za-z]{2,}ome\b`](https://regex101.com/r/TdF4kr/1)
* We could use the special "word character" symbol of `\w` to indicate that letters, numbers, and underscores are what we mean: [`\w{2,}ome\b`](https://regex101.com/r/sh6CV5/1).

> In both of these cases, the matches we get back are the longer words that end in "ome" -- namely, "genome", "exome", and "proteome".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In both of these cases, the matches we get back are the longer words that end in "ome" -- namely, "genome," "exome," and "proteome."
```

The **lookahead** regular expression syntax takes the form of `(?=regex)` where `regex` is replaced with what you're looking for.  So, for example, our pattern for the second decimal number, which is currently in a capturing group and looks like: `([\d\.]+)` could be placed between `(?=` and `)`, giving us `(?=([\d\.]+))`.
Go ahead and [try that in a regex checker](https://regex101.com/r/NvzPb0/1) and you should see something like the following:

![The regular expression shows five matches, each of which has two captured groups.](media/lookahead.png) <!-- style = "border: 1px solid rgb(var(--color-highlight));" -->

<div class = "behind-the-scenes">
<b style="color: rgb(var(--color-highlight));">Behind the scenes</b><br>

> There are other types of "lookarounds", including **lookbehinds**, that you might consider learning if you write a lot of regular expressions, but for now, the lookahead by itself will serve you well for more complex cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are other types of "lookarounds," including **lookbehinds**, that you might consider learning if you write a lot of regular expressions, but for now, the lookahead by itself will serve you well for more complex cases.
```

Reviewer: Maybe include a link if someone is really curious?

</div>

## Quiz 4: Anchors, Boundaries, and Lookaheads

What's the anchor character that indicates the "start of a string"?

[[^]]
<script>
  let input = "@input".trim();
  input == "^";
</script>
***
<div class = "answer">

The anchor for the start of a string is the caret, or `^`, symbol.

</div>
***

What's the anchor character that indicates the "end of a string"?

[[$]]
<script>
  let input = "@input".trim();
  input == "$";
</script>
***
<div class = "answer">

The anchor for the start of a string is the dollar sign, or `$`, symbol.

</div>
***

What's the two character sequence that indicates the boundary between a word-type character (like a letter, number, or underscore) and a non-word-type character (like punctuation or spaces)?

[[\b]]
<script>
  let input = "@input".trim();
  input == "\b";

> </script>

Reviewer: This isn't acting correctly, maybe an escape character is needed?

Author: hmmm it's working for me, can you tell me what you're seeing exactly that "isn't correct"?

Author: whoops you're right, fixed in new commit

***
<div class = "answer">

> The code for a word boundary is ` \b `.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The code for a word boundary is `\b`.
```

Author: agree, added in new commit, not sure why I did it this way????

</div>
***

Which of these is true about lookaheads in regular expressions?

[( )] Lookaheads use the syntax ` \w`

> [( )] Lookaheads can be helpful when dealing with overlapping patterns

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[(X)] Lookaheads can be helpful when dealing with overlapping patterns
```

[( )] Lookaheads describe special places in a string, like the very beginning or the very end.
***
<div class = "answer">

The syntax ` \w` actually indicates a word character, like a letter, number, or underscore.  Lookaheads use a syntax like `(?=regex)`.

Lookaheads are ideal for overlapping patterns, and prevent missing matches.

The word that describes special places in the string, like the very beginning or end, is **anchor**, not lookahead.

</div>
***

## Additional Resources

> Here are some good "cheat sheets":

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here are some good cheat sheets:
```

> * A fairly comprehensive cheat sheet is available [from Dave Child](https://cheatography.com/davechild/cheat-sheets/regular-expressions/).
> * There's another good cheat sheet for regex [from DataCamp](https://images.datacamp.com/image/upload/v1665049611/Marketing/Blog/Regular_Expressions_Cheat_Sheet.pdf.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [Dave Child's cheat sheet](https://cheatography.com/davechild/cheat-sheets/regular-expressions/) is fairly comprehensive.
* [DataCamp's cheat sheet for regex](https://images.datacamp.com/image/upload/v1665049611/Marketing/Blog/Regular_Expressions_Cheat_Sheet.pdf) is another good option.
```

* **Multiline (m)**.  This flag indicates that each line should be treated as its own string, instead of all the lines being considered one string.  This is important when working with start-of-string and end-of-string **anchors**, which we'll talk about later in this module.
* **Ignore / Insensitive (i)**.  "Ignore" indicates that pattern matching should be case-insensitive, so that differences in capitalization are ignored.

If you use different "flags" than we do (for example, if you're not using the default [Regex 101](https://www.regex101.com) as your regex checker), you might see an occasional difference in how the regular expression we show works in your environment.  In the regex checker you're using, try setting your flags to "global" and "multiline", and you should get identical results to what we show here in this module.  The flags usually are shown following a forward slash, appearing just after the regular expression ends:

> ![](media/example1.png)<!-- style = "border: 1px solid rgb(var(--color-highlight)); max-width: 400px;" -->

Author: ```suggestion
![A regular expression checker box labeled "regular expression" includes a forward slash, the phrase "insert your regular expression here", a forward slash, and the letters "g" and "m". ](media/example1.png)<!-- style = "border: 1px solid rgb(var(--color-highlight)); max-width: 400px;" -->
```

> ![](media/example2.png)<!-- style = "border: 1px solid rgb(var(--color-highlight)); max-width: 300px;" -->

Author: ```suggestion
![A sample regular expression: `([A-Z])\w+` is enclosed within forward slashes.  After the closing forward slash, the letter "g" appears.](media/example2.png)<!-- style = "border: 1px solid rgb(var(--color-highlight)); max-width: 300px;" -->
```
